quickstart.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: Quick Start
group: navigation
---

{% include JB/setup %}

# Melange tutorial

In this tutorial you will learn how to make executable languages and how Melange can help you to write generic algorithms for a familly of language thanks to Model Type.

We will first design 4 differents languages close enough that we would write one tool for all of them, and then will do it !

## Variants of language

Melange is a tool to manipulate languages and we will explore its possibilities. But first we need a familly of languages.

In this chapter we will create four differents languages which are variations of Finite State Machine language.

### What is a Finite State Machine

>It is conceived as an abstract machine that can be in one of a finite number of states. The machine is in only one state at a time; the state it is in at any given time is called the current state. It can change from one state to another when initiated by a triggering event or condition; this is called a transition. A particular FSM is defined by a list of its states, and the triggering condition for each transition.
>
>![FSM](http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/d8/Automate-impair.png)

[From Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Finite-state_machine)

#### Targeted FSM languages

The variations of FSM language we will design are:

 * Simple FSM<br>
   This language is the most basic. It is able to define FSM with States and Transition handling Event.
 * Timed FSM<br>
   This language is the same as Simple FSM except you can add time on Transition.
 * Composite FSM<br>
   This language is the same as Simple FSM except State can contains sub States.
 * Timed composite FSM<br>
   This language as its name suggest, have both composite States and time on Transitions.

### Designing languages

#### Simple FSM

If we do a list of elements for our language we have:

 - A State Machine
 - Some States
 - An Initial State (it's the entry point of the State Machine)
 - A Final State (we need also an exit point)
 - Some Transitions

Each point of this list will be an element in the model representing our language.

![Simple FSM](images/fsmSimple.png)

##### Modeling

Melange is based on the Eclipse Modeling Framework to defining languages.
EMF provide editors creating models that we will use to define our Simple FSM language.

Define the model:

 1. Go in `File > New > Project...` and select `Eclipse Modeling Framework > Empty EMF Project`, then click `Next`<br>
    Name your project "org.sample.metamodel.fsm", then `Finish`.
 2. Right click on the 'model' folder and go in `New > Others ...`<br>
    Select `Eclipse Modeling Framework > Ecore model`, then `Next`<br>
    Name it "fsm.ecore" and click `Finish`
 3. In the opened .ecore you have a root package with no name.<br>
    Open the Properties view (Menu `Show View > Other... > General > Properties`)<br>
    Set "finitestatemachine" for name, "finitestatemachine" for Ns prefix and "org.sample.fsm" for Ns URI.
 4. For each elements of our language add an EClass in the root package with a right click and `New Child > EClass`<br>
    You can edit the EClass name in the Propeties view.
 5. Right click on the Transition then `New Child > EAttribute`<br>
    In the Properties view name it 'event' and set EType to EString.<br>
 6. To link elements to each other you can add EReference with the right click on EClass.<br>
    In the Properties view name and set EType to the targeted EClass. You can also change lower/upper bound and the containment properties if needed.

Generate the Java code:

  1. Right clic on the model folder, `New > Other...` and select `Eclipse Modeling Framework > EMF Generator Model`, then `Next`
  2. Name it "fsm.genmodel" and put it in model folder, then `Next`.
  3. Select Ecore model, then `Next`
  4. `Browse Workspace` and select fsm.ecore, then `Next`
  5. Their is only one package so clic `Finish`.
  6. Open fsm.genmodel, do a right clic on the root and select `Generate Model Code`. It will make Java classes from your .ecore.

##### Weaving aspects

In this section we will use Kermeta 3 to add behavior on our model.

 1. Go in `File > New > Project...` and select `Kermeta 3 > K3 Project`
    Name your project "org.sample.simplefsm.aspect" and click on `Finish`
 2. Open the `META-INF/MANIFEST.MF` and in the `dependencies` tab add Plug-ins
    - org.sample.simplefsm
    - org.sample.timedfsm
    - org.sample.compositefsm
    - org.sample.timedcompositefsm
 3. Change the name of the "sample" package for "org.sample.simplefsm" (right click `Refactor > Rename...`)
 4. Create a new file "Aspects.xtend" in this package (right click `New > File`) and open it.
 5. Declare the containing package and import the annotation from Kermeta 3 that we will use to define aspect.
    
    ~~~xtend
    package org.sample.simplefsm;
    
    import fr.inria.diverse.k3.al.annotationprocessor.Aspect
    ~~~
    
 6. We want to define behavior on elements of our model. Kermeta 3 allows us to add new properties and
    operations in existing classes without extending them.
    All we just need to do is writing a new class and using the K3's annotation to weave it on the base class.

For example for the Transition:

~~~xtend
@Aspect(className=Transition)
class TransitionAspect {
	
	def public void fire(){
		
		val fsm = _self.stateMachine

		val target = _self.target
		_self.stateMachine.currentState = target

		println("fire : " + _self.event)
	}
}
~~~

With the **@Aspect** we re-open the class "Transition" to add a method fire() implementing its behavior.

The attribute 'currentState' doesn't exist in StateMachine but we can add it by aspect:

~~~xtend
@Aspect(className=StateMachine)
	class StateMachineAspect {
		State currentState

		def void init(){
			currentState = _self.states.findFirst[InitialState]
		}

      def void eval(List<String> event){
			init()
			event.forEach[ event |
				val transition = currentState.getActiveTransition(event)
				transition?.fire()
			]
      }
	}
}
~~~

And of course State need getActiveTransition(String):

~~~xtend
@Aspect(className=State)
class StateAspect {
	def public Transition getActiveTransitions(String event){
		_self.outgoing?.forEach[ transition |
			if(transition.event == event) return transition
		]
		return null
	}
}
~~~

Then you need some imports at the begin of Aspect.xtend to enable the call of aspect's methods for base classes

~~~xtend
import static extension finitestatemachines.StateAspect.*
import static extension finitestatemachines.StateMachineAspect.*
import static extension finitestatemachines.TransitionAspect.*
~~~

For more details, have a look at the Kermeta 3 documentation : [Defining aspects](https://github.com/diverse-project/k3/wiki/Defining-aspects-in-Kermeta-3)

#### Others FSM

For other variantes of FSM language process in the same way as for the Simple FSM project.

##### Timed FSM

We add an EAttribut **time : EInt** in Transition
![Simple FSM](images/fsmTimed.png)

##### Composite FSM

We add a containment EReference **substates : State** in State
![Simple FSM](images/fsmComposite.png)

##### Timed composite

We add same changes as Timed and Composite FSM
![Simple FSM](images/fsmTimedComposite.png)

## The Melange world

### New project

### Interface of language : the Model Type

### Transformation?

## Conclusion

In this tutorial you learnt how to add behavior on a language and used Melange to write a generic algorithm for different (but close) languages.

Commit message:

Tutorial : add New Melange Project section

quickstart.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: Quick Start
group: navigation
---

{% include JB/setup %}

# Melange tutorial

In this tutorial you will learn how to make executable languages and how Melange can help you to write generic algorithms for a familly of language thanks to Model Type.

We will first design 4 differents languages close enough that we would write one tool for all of them, and then will do it !

## Variants of language

Melange is a tool to manipulate languages and we will explore its possibilities. But first we need a family of languages.

In this chapter we will create four differents languages which are variations of Finite State Machine language.

### What is a Finite State Machine

>It is conceived as an abstract machine that can be in one of a finite number of states. The machine is in only one state at a time; the state it is in at any given time is called the current state. It can change from one state to another when initiated by a triggering event or condition; this is called a transition. A particular FSM is defined by a list of its states, and the triggering condition for each transition.
>
>![FSM](http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/d8/Automate-impair.png)

[From Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Finite-state_machine)

#### Targeted FSM languages

The variations of FSM language we will design are:

 * Simple FSM<br>
   This language is the most basic. It is able to define FSM with States and Transition handling Event.
 * Timed FSM<br>
   This language is the same as Simple FSM except you can add time on Transition.
 * Composite FSM<br>
   This language is the same as Simple FSM except State can contains sub States.
 * Timed composite FSM<br>
   This language as its name suggest, have both composite States and time on Transitions.

### Designing languages

#### Simple FSM

If we do a list of elements for our language we have:

 - A State Machine
 - Some States
 - An Initial State (it's the entry point of the State Machine)
 - A Final State (we need also an exit point)
 - Some Transitions

Each point of this list will be an element in the model representing our language.

![Simple FSM](images/fsmSimple.png)

##### Modeling

Melange is based on the Eclipse Modeling Framework to defining languages.
EMF provide editors creating models that we will use to define our Simple FSM language.

Define the model:

 1. Go in `File > New > Project...` and select `Eclipse Modeling Framework > Empty EMF Project`, then click `Next`<br>
    Name your project "org.sample.metamodel.fsm", then `Finish`.
 2. Right click on the 'model' folder and go in `New > Others ...`<br>
    Select `Eclipse Modeling Framework > Ecore model`, then `Next`<br>
    Name it "fsm.ecore" and click `Finish`
 3. In the opened .ecore you have a root package with no name.<br>
    Open the Properties view (Menu `Show View > Other... > General > Properties`)<br>
    Set "finitestatemachine" for name, "finitestatemachine" for Ns prefix and "org.sample.fsm" for Ns URI.
 4. For each elements of our language add an EClass in the root package with a right click and `New Child > EClass`<br>
    You can edit the EClass name in the Propeties view.
 5. Right click on the Transition then `New Child > EAttribute`<br>
    In the Properties view name it 'event' and set EType to EString.<br>
 6. To link elements to each other you can add EReference with the right click on EClass.<br>
    In the Properties view name and set EType to the targeted EClass. You can also change lower/upper bound and the containment properties if needed.

Generate the Java code:

  1. Right clic on the model folder, `New > Other...` and select `Eclipse Modeling Framework > EMF Generator Model`, then `Next`
  2. Name it "fsm.genmodel" and put it in model folder, then `Next`.
  3. Select Ecore model, then `Next`
  4. `Browse Workspace` and select fsm.ecore, then `Next`
  5. Their is only one package so clic `Finish`.
  6. Open fsm.genmodel, do a right clic on the root and select `Generate Model Code`. It will make Java classes from your .ecore.

##### Weaving aspects

In this section we will use Kermeta 3 to add behavior on our model.

 1. Go in `File > New > Project...` and select `Kermeta 3 > K3 Project`
    Name your project "org.sample.simplefsm.aspect" and click on `Finish`
 2. Open the `META-INF/MANIFEST.MF` and in the `dependencies` tab add Plug-ins
    - org.sample.simplefsm
    - org.sample.timedfsm
    - org.sample.compositefsm
    - org.sample.timedcompositefsm
 3. Change the name of the "sample" package for "org.sample.simplefsm" (right click `Refactor > Rename...`)
 4. Create a new file "Aspects.xtend" in this package (right click `New > File`) and open it.
 5. Declare the containing package and import the annotation from Kermeta 3 that we will use to define aspect.
    
    ~~~xtend
    package org.sample.simplefsm;
    
    import fr.inria.diverse.k3.al.annotationprocessor.Aspect
    ~~~
    
 6. We want to define behavior on elements of our model. Kermeta 3 allows us to add new properties and
    operations in existing classes without extending them.
    All we just need to do is writing a new class and using the K3's annotation to weave it on the base class.

For example for the Transition:

~~~xtend
@Aspect(className=Transition)
class TransitionAspect {
	
	def public void fire(){
		
		val fsm = _self.stateMachine

		val target = _self.target
		_self.stateMachine.currentState = target

		println("fire : " + _self.event)
	}
}
~~~

With the **@Aspect** we re-open the class "Transition" to add a method fire() implementing its behavior.

The attribute 'currentState' doesn't exist in StateMachine but we can add it by aspect:

~~~xtend
@Aspect(className=StateMachine)
	class StateMachineAspect {
		State currentState

		def void init(){
			currentState = _self.states.findFirst[InitialState]
		}

      def void eval(List<String> event){
			init()
			event.forEach[ event |
				val transition = currentState.getActiveTransition(event)
				transition?.fire()
			]
      }
	}
}
~~~

And of course State need getActiveTransition(String):

~~~xtend
@Aspect(className=State)
class StateAspect {
	def public Transition getActiveTransitions(String event){
		_self.outgoing?.forEach[ transition |
			if(transition.event == event) return transition
		]
		return null
	}
}
~~~

Then you need some imports at the begin of Aspect.xtend to enable the call of aspect's methods for base classes

~~~xtend
import static extension finitestatemachines.StateAspect.*
import static extension finitestatemachines.StateMachineAspect.*
import static extension finitestatemachines.TransitionAspect.*
~~~

For more details, have a look at the Kermeta 3 documentation : [Defining aspects](https://github.com/diverse-project/k3/wiki/Defining-aspects-in-Kermeta-3)

#### Others FSM

For other variantes of FSM language process in the same way as for the Simple FSM project.

##### Timed FSM

We add an EAttribut **time : EInt** in Transition
![Simple FSM](images/fsmTimed.png)

##### Composite FSM

We add a containment EReference **substates : State** in State
![Simple FSM](images/fsmComposite.png)

##### Timed composite

We add same changes as Timed and Composite FSM
![Simple FSM](images/fsmTimedComposite.png)

## The Melange world

### New project

To create a Melange project using your family of language:

 1. Go in the menu `File > New > Project...` and select `Melange > Melange Project`, then clic `Next`.
 2. Put "org.melange.fsm" in Project name and clic `Next`.
 3. Check `Create a plug-in using one of the templates` and select `Simple Melange project`, then `Next`.
 4. Set "org.sample.fsm" as package, and change language name to SimpleFSM. Browse the location to select fsm.ecore from the Simple FSM project, then `Finish`.
 5. Open the `META-INF/MANIFEST.MF` and in the `dependencies` tab add Plug-ins
    - org.sample.timedfsm
    - org.sample.compositefsm
    - org.sample.timedcompositefsm
    org.sample.simplefsm should be already there thanks to the wizard.
 6. In the .melange file, copy-paste the `language SimpleFSM{...}` for other languages (and adapt them).

### Interface of language : the Model Type

### Transformation?

## Conclusion

In this tutorial you learnt how to add behavior on a language and used Melange to write a generic algorithm for different (but close) languages.
